The first series of questions I should like to ask
have to do with your academic background and your
interest in oceanography.
How and when did you acquire an interest in marine
biology and oceanography? Well, how far back do
you want to go? Wherever the beginning is. Really,
I would describe it to my mother, who grew up in
Gloucester, and they come from a fishing family.
And ever since I was born, that's the age of three
months, we would spend summers in an island in
Maine and explore the beaches. And she had the
training and background to explain primarily the
biology, not necessarily the physical
oceanography of the beaches. And we did that until
really I went off to school for 16 years. We would
spend the entire summer from the end of school to
the beginning until Labor Day. So I would say that
was really the very beginning. Yeah. You're from
Massachusetts, right? Yeah. OK. Why did you
choose the University of Washington? Well, of
course, the time that I would be going to school,
this was wartime in the 40s. And the University of
Washington, I didn't come to some time. I spent
some time at sea. This was my interest in being at
sea. And I was a graduate of the Massachusetts
Maritime Academy, in which we studied
meteorology. And it really wasn't considered
oceanography, but it was the science of the sea,
marine science. And at the end of the war,
well, let me say during the war, I worked as a ship's
officer with the Army Transportation Corps.
graduated from the academy with a commission as
ensign in the navy but rather than go right into the
navy i went into the large ship area of army
transportation corps at the end of the war i had
some navy duty and became involved in submarines
so i i have a master's license in the maritime
service and acquired that at age 23 and felt that I
had explored that and I had some tour in the Navy
qualified submarine officer and felt that I had
explored that and was interested in a further in
the study of the science of the sea oceanography.
This was available to naval officers at the Naval
Postgraduate School which was attached or had
some role with Scripps and I was interested in that
program, but wasn't eligible for it. So I got out of
the Navy. And one of the ship's officers' father
was the provost at Rhode Island, University of
Rhode Island. And he wrote to me and told me about
the Dr. Fishers, the two Dr. Fishers at Rhode
Island. And he recommended that I go to the
University of Washington because it was a new
school, and they were starting a new program
exclusively in oceanography. So it came as a
result of the Navy and a recommendation from the
provost at the University of Rhode Island. You
arrived here at Washington about the same time
Fleming got here to establish the school. Just
after. He arrived in 51 and I was here in 53, early in
53. And you stayed until 55. Did you go to school
full-time between 1953 and 1955? Yes, actually, I
stayed until 1957. Okay.
You must have worked on a Ph.D. for a while then.
According to my notes, your master's degree is
1955. Well, I finished the work then, but I
didn't... What happened is that the university at
the time had an extensive contract with this
center. At this time, it was the Bureau of
Commercial Fisheries. And I worked on that, and I
was interested in it. So I didn't finish the degree
work for the master's degree. I didn't go through
the formalities of obtaining it and got involved
in an extensive ocean program here. And the degree
made very little difference to the people here.
But when I wanted to go on to get the PhD, People
insisted that I clear up the master's degree, so I
did. And so I've been here directly from the
University of Washington since 57. But I studied
at the university and at Oregon State University.
Right. Your PhD is from Oregon State. Yes. I'm sort
of intrigued about the close relationship
between physical oceanography, meteorology,
and marine biology that you put together. Was
there any particular reason for that? Yes,
because... All of my training in the Navy and the
submarines was more of a physical nature, not a
biological nature. And I wasn't specifically
interested in the unique, finite studies of
biology. But having come from the center and
realizing I was coming back from the center in my
third option, I took marine biology. Because in
the period I was here, I felt, and this decision was
made before I came here, that I was interested in in
what you would call today's sort of ecosystem
approach. It was the total study of a segment of the
ocean, large or small, not the individual study of
any one discipline. So that's why the two came
together. The physical oceanography and the
meteorology were extensions of my other previous
studies. And the biology came from the center
here, the interest in it. And so you would suggest
then that your interest in marine biology then
develops after you or Ole Miss jobs for practical
interest increasing. What did you first do when
you went to work here? Well, I came here right in
charge of the oceanography program. They didn't
have any field studies here. The center was
established as an exploratory fishing base that
had a fishing vessel and a fishing class that just
went fishing. And they had what we called at that
time a biological laboratory, which did
research. But it was primarily research on salmon
in the streams, the Columbia River and in the
Alaskan streams. It did not have what you'd call an
ocean research program. And so in 1953, which was
while I was studying, the International North
Pacific Fisheries Commission was formed, which
was a transocean study of the distribution and
movement of salmon. And in order to study this,
then we developed here at the center an
operational program to catch salmon at sea and to
make the environmental measurements that tried
to assess what it was in the sea that may be guiding
the movements of the salmon. So
as I said, I worked on this program at the
university for a year. and the contract of the
university was referred back to the laboratory.
The laboratory established the staff, and I
headed it up. So I've been the head of the first and
the only oceanographic program here since the
center started. What direction have you tried to
take your program? I realize it would be largely
practical because that's what oceanography is
about in terms of government. What else did you do?
What did you have in mind doing, constructing?
Well, I think there are really three phases. At
that time, we knew very little about the North
Pacific Ocean. There were very few cruises that
had been conducted. The University of Washington
had just the year before entered out into the
ocean. They were mainly a Puget Sound study. Wayne
Bird hadn't started his program at Oregon State at
that time. There was no program at the University
of Alaska. We were basically the only group. This
was a tri-nation treaty, Canada, Japan, the
United States. And so between the three of us, the
three groups, we kind of split the northern North
Pacific Ocean into three areas, the western part
by the Japanese, the central part, which we took
over, and the eastern part in the Gulf of Alaska by
the Canadian group under Dr. Tully. And our first
attempt was really to just define what was the
steady state, what were the mean conditions over a
year's time. And having put in the pieces and were
able to show the continuity of the ocean from the
western side to the eastern at subsurface levels.
There had always been charts of temperature,
surface temperature, surface salinity. The
observations of depth were not there. There were a
number of questions that we couldn't answer. And
having defined that, then we looked at the annual
time changes. And at that point, we started
relating them to the distribution of movements in
Sandman. And we were quite successful, I think, in
that. And we've gone from that into
what you might call a historical study. We were so
caught up with the individual cruises and
processing the data from individual cruises, we
really didn't look at the ocean as an entity. And
having gone back and looked at 10, 20, or 30 years
where the data we find long-term changes that were
masked by our individual yearly cruises, And so
we've gone from that point into really a model
study. Now we're in numerical models of the whole
system, how the wind stress affects the flow and
how this affects the deeper layers and what years
there were unusual stresses in certain areas that
would divert systems that we assume that the fish
in the ocean have followed. So it's kind of a
complete study all the way through from just basic
Observations to monitoring to investigation to
numerical models, which is where we are now. And I
assume you'll stay with that a while. What do you
propose for the immediate future? At the present
time, we're involved in two. areas. One is
numerical models that permit us to see in terms of
one month to several months ahead what the
conditions will be in the ocean, and we hope to
relate that to fishing strategy. And the other is
what I really had in mind when I came here, and
that's ecosystems models. In this, we are
handling the coastal zone, the shallow shelf of
the eastern Bering Sea, although it's 500
kilometers wide and around the Gulf. And this is
the interactions of the various components,
marine components in the system, and how they
react to changes in the environment. So it's sort
of a physical and a biological. So you see, I'm
still right in my niche here. Now, I have a series of
specific questions I'd like to ask you to comment
on, if you could, or would, really. And primarily,
they concern your work. And these questions are
primarily designed to help probably explain
further what you're doing. How accurate are we in
the stage of using physical circulation data in
describing the distribution of marine fisheries
such as salmon?
Well, I don't know. when you say accuracy i think we
have shown that the area in which salmon are found
in the oceans are bounded by physical processes or
physical physical chemical boundaries as we see
them uh fronts so to speak and uh we see areas in
which uh The separation of salmon that will return
to Asia and salmon that will return to North
America follow these boundaries or these
systems. But a great deal more work has to be done in
this regard because there still is the feeling by
the biologists that there is an extensive
intermingling that it's very difficult to make
any sense out of at this time because of the limited
observations you have. Perhaps I can clarify that
a little more. My feeling is that Most of the salmon
fishing is done at night, and this is the time in
which salmon come to the surface. And if you take
this catch and identify the salmon from
heuristics or morphological characteristics or
serological characteristics, you're able to
show that this is, at times, a mixture of Asian and
North American. This is usually at the boundaries
of these fronts. And so the biologist is quick to
assume that this indicates mixing and therefore a
random distribution. My feeling is that there is a
separation in strata, whereas although they're
at the surface at night feeding and we catch them at
night at gill nets, that during the daytime and as
they move, that they move as discrete units and
they can be separated. So it's our fishing method
of capture that I think prevents us from this
unique separation that I sincerely believe
exists in the ocean. Well, in a way, you're
Anticipating my next question.
Modeling, particularly marine productive
models and biological modeling. If I may say so,
sort of the end thing now for marine biologists to
do. How accurate are they, and how satisfied are
you with them? Well, at this time, of course, this
is a very controversial area, but I can answer your
question very directly if If you took a group of
people, there are those people who feel that man is
never going to be able to model nature to the other
people that feel that man can do it very capably.
There are still people that are so confused as to
how to model, say, primary production, which is
just the plant production, and their inability
really to see all the facets of that, that they
can't see how that you can go on to the next step. But
I think that we here at the Center have made great
strides for several reasons, one of which we have
limited our present study to the eastern Bering
Sea shelf, which is not a huge oceanic area having
tremendous depth. It's rather a closed system. As
you can see, it's bounded by the Alaskan Peninsula
and bounded by the Asian continent. So you really
can treat that as an ecosystem. And I think this is
rather unique. Now, what we have done is not to
start with primary production, where most
modelists do. And they base it that you can't have
the next level unless you have a certain amount.
There's usually an order of magnitude decrease as
you go up the food web or food chain. But we have
started right with the fish and found out what it is
that they require to eat and the amounts and what
the amounts of forage that what they're eating
require. and built an ecosystem that way, and we
think it's quite remarkable. What we have done is
taken eight components, two fish, two mammals,
two birds, and two forms of plankton that interact
and are the dominant forms in their area. In some
cases, they represent 90% of a specific biomass.
The fish, for instance, is pollock. Pollock
constitutes 90% of the biomass in the eastern
Bering Sea. These are eaten by seals. euphosids at
some times and they're cannibalistic at other
times. And you get a balance this way. You get
tremendous insight into the ecosystem of the
area. And I'll just point out two things because I
could talk for several hours on that. The two
things are that we find that a low percentage of the
phytoplankton is really consumed in the eastern
Bering Sea. It's not limiting. Probably only 30%
is utilized by the the planktonic forms that are
forage organisms. The rest just drops to the
bottom and is assumed by the benthos. So right
away, somebody dealing with the primary
production model is off base. And the other thing
is that we're finding interactions
of the juvenile fish are very significant. And
this is an area that no one studies. The
oceanographers will study phytoplankton,
zooplankton, and sometimes ichthyoplankton by
itself. And we, as a center, study only the
commercial phase with great big huge nets. And
what we're finding is the bulk of the biomass is in
the juvenile fish who are eaten and being eaten in a
tremendous cannibalistic and
Sort of a sequence of events, and we're finding out
that indeed starvation must play a very important
role in the whole system there. No one has ever put
their hand on before because they just drop out,
fall to the bottom, and nobody really catches
them. You mean the fish starvation? Yes,
starvation of the fish themselves. There are
areas and times where they just can't do that,
can't find enough forage to survive. So what we've
done is this is a lot of this preliminary modeling
has been done by Tyler here, who works with me. And
so what we have is these eight components, and we
follow them through a year cycle, filling in gaps
where the data are not available, and balance the
system out. And we've been able to balance it out
for five years. And since the mammals don't get
tremendously fat or the fish don't die out, we're
looking for an equilibrium that all of these
things can interact. And in that sense, I think
this is Just a tremendous asset to the center that
we're just exploiting. I think it's absolutely
necessary that in fisheries management and
understanding the ecosystem of the eastern
Bering Sea that people understand these things.
And we are astonishing people on a month-to-month
basis as things that invariably people say, well,
you know, I always thought that was true, but I
never knew how to approach it. So my answer is that
if man is ever able to, duplicate nature, which I
think will be difficult. I think this is one of the
routes to go in the bulk sense that tremendous new
bits of information are becoming available. We
have just increased the model from eight
components to 25 components in the sense to work in
the benthos, and the model becomes very
complicated at that point. And whether we can deal
with the sensitivity of so many interactions.
That's what we're looking at right now. So I am a
strong advocate of this approach, and I think it's
working tremendously well in the eastern . Quite
clear. No one can complain about that. What sort of
experience have you done with drift models in
terms of tracing currents? We've done a
considerable amount of work. in fact probably
four or five years worth of work off the washington
coast and in the aleutian area and we have actually
done some bottom drifter work in the kodiak island
area and these of course have tremendous
limitations but i still think it's a useful it's a
useful exercise and an inexpensive one provided
you don't release literally tens of thousands of
these things because they're being accused of
being polluted. Pollution objects, glass
drifting on the beaches, are plastic cards that
are not biodegradable. I think when you're
studying an area that you don't know where the
circulation is, that they're invaluable. And I
think if you're looking at a small area, that is
bounded where you can expect people to return the
cards, it's unusually valuable. But I'm not an
advocate of people that just do it because they
hope something will happen. What I'm saying is
that you have to... I think what I'm saying is that
most of the exploratory work in drift object has
been done, and there's very little sense to do any
more unless you have a very finite project that
wants to find out a single answer. If I release
something here at a given time, will it come here in
Vancouver Island or here? But just the huge
releases, there's no need for those anymore in our
area. So I would say, yes, we used it, used it
effectively, and except for very specific
projects, we have passed out of that phase. Is
there any alternative, by the way, to drift
models? Well, of course, it's the only thing that
people can say really positive about drift
bottles is that they're cheap. And, of course, the
immediate solution and one that has worked out
very well is satellite tracking of buoys. And we
were the first to get involved in this in the
Pacific Ocean. We have a paper for a transponding
buoy in the Pacific Ocean. We were the first group,
I was, to get a frequency allocated for it.
telemetry buoy work. And the information is just,
well, as they say in Washington, D.C., or did a few
years ago, mind-boggling, because what we're
seeing is the tremendous complexities of eddies
that are part of the general circulation system.
And we have to point out very quickly that our
satellite track buoy program didn't get off the
ground because at the time we had the buoys The buoy
project was transferred to Bay St. Louis under the
Coast Guard. And all funds in the fishery service
dried up for these expensive buoys. And so we ended
up with them in the barn. We gave everybody our
technology. We worked with NASA and had them
tracked with NASA groups in the Bering Sea. And so
we don't have any, well, the first experiment we
had, we released buoys right off the coast. This is
an interesting part of the oceanography of the
Pacific Ocean. is that anybody will tell you that
the Eastwood flow across the Pacific diverges off
the Washington coast, but nobody can give you an
explanation or a physical basis for this. In other
words, does it diverge at 40 in the winter and 50 in
the summer, or does it fluctuate back and forth?
Nobody can tell you that, and we're only going to
find it out by drifting buoy experiments. But our
buoy program,
was just an isolated number
of experiments that I really... I'm not going to
take your time to go into, but I would say the recent
ones that are done by the OXIEP, this is the Outer
Continental Shelf Environmental Program, have
been very fantastic. They have found buoys
drifting in the northern Gulf of Alaska where the
research is concentrated because that's where
they're drilling the oil. They have found buoys
that will... perform three and four orbits of
non-tidal period around some of the lees of these
islands in the Gulf. And I'm talking of something
that will occur over 25 or 30 days. This provides a
tremendous concentrating or resting mechanism
for migrating salmon and anything else you want.
No one has ever even imagined that this sort of
thing would happen. So I would say the solution is
the the tracking buoys, that we should do more of
them as soon as we can. And I think the results of the
ones that have been accomplished by the OXIEP
group. Actually, it's interesting. Let me just
give you a sideline here. I told you that we
developed the buoy and had them here in the
mid-1960s. When OXIEP wanted to deal with
drifting buoys here, they had to go to Don Hanson at
Miami. He's at the AOML lab. And he's the one now
that's doing satellite track buoy experiments in
the Gulf of Alaska for the oil company. And yet, if
we had been able to continue with our program 10
years ago, we probably would be doing it. He has to
fly up or send his people all the way across the
country to do these experiments, because he's the
only one that has experience with the buoys now. So
that's one of the many things that kind of slipped
by the wayside, because fisheries have been
really reticent to get into an expensive program
of environmental studies. Well, that's a long
answer for just drift models, but I thought you
might know that. I know. I need to know that. As a
matter of fact, I had a question down here written
in. What is a transponding oceanographic buoy?
Because I had no idea what it was. And what was its
function was my second part.
What else do you think needs to be done in terms of
this area, oceanographic?
Well, of course, we need a great deal more study.
And really, we don't need a lot more people coming
with vessels and ships and instrumentation. What
we need is some real good coordination. And lots of
times, if I get requests from the National Science
Foundation to review some of these studies in the
Antarctic or some of these other places where Work
has been going on for a long time. I also find it
necessary to put at the bottom, why don't you do
some of the studies off your own coast? And of
course, they're considered world
oceanographers rather than local. And by dealing
with fisheries and by dealing with governmental
problems, I'm really more concerned about local
problems than world problems. And so what we need
to do is to pull all of this work together. I would
say that if the United States marine agencies on
this coast spend upwards of $100 million in marine
science. They have this at their disposal.
Whether they spend it in the Arctic or the
Antarctic or the Mediterranean Sea, it doesn't
matter. But it's there. And yet there is no
coordinating group. Fisheries won't coordinate
it. NOAA doesn't seem to want to coordinate it. The
universities have poor coordination. And a great
deal of the money is wasted. So what we need is I
really don't want to say a committee because
everybody abhors committee, but what we need is
coordination. And with coordination, we would be
able to answer these problems. And I can give you an
example of that. We have excellent evidence that
there is a northward flow at the shelf edge along
our coast, all the way from California right up
into the Gulf of Alaska. There have been no
specific measurements. of this. There have been a
few drift bottle measurements at the surface, a
few trog measurements at the surface, a few
speculations of geostrophic flow based upon
station data. But this is a very significant flow.
It could affect fisheries and biology
tremendously. and yet there is no coordinated
attempt. People at Oregon State will look at it and
then quit, and somebody higher at the University
of Washington will look at it when they get a
cruise. And this is what I think we're missing in
fisheries. What we need to know is the integrity of
these systems, because this is what will contain a
population. The population will stay in the
system and do it. So I could give you a long list of
things. That is just one. We need to know the
function of the divergence off the coast. There's
tremendous variability, which we have shown in
our reports. A good example is this cold water that
comes out of the Otcott Sea just below the depth of
winter turnover. This is about, say, 200 to 300
meters. There's good evidence that this
Gradually, over a period of five or ten years,
we'll move into the Gulf of Alaska and intrude
almost onto the shelf. Well, as this water
intrudes on the shelf of the Gulf of Alaska, it will
change at least the migration paths, if not the
whole distribution of fauna in that area. And yet,
it's been over ten years since we've had anybody
that is able to document these conditions at
depth.
What kind of cooperative research have you had
with Japan, for example? And what's your opinion
of the cooperative research that's being carried
on, really, in this area of the northern Pacific?
Well, let me say that, of course, the early
studies, the big A specific study was NORPAC in
1955, in which this was pretty well done by Oscar
Setti and Roger Abell and Joe Reed at Scripps.
Setti, of course, was a Bureau of Commercial
Fisheries person. And at that time, they had all
kinds of difficulties with the accuracy of their
observations and getting them to complete their
work. Then we had EASTROPAC.
Not, let me see, I'm thinking of, well, there was a
big study in the Western Pacific that was a little
more successful. And I'm trying to get to the point
where, at the present time, the Japanese have
tried to join most of the American operations. And
actually, at this time, they have one individual
in Japan that sort of rides herd on each one of our
major ocean thrust, so to speak. They have someone
that speaks for IDOE, someone that speaks for
probes, which is the processes and resources of
the Eastern Bering Sea study. And so they have, you
going to change that? Sure, please do.